= plus2json --play Graph Coverage

xtUML Project Analysis Note

== 1 Abstract

This note provides requirements, analysis and the work required to an
enhancement to `plus2json --play`.  The enhancement causes plus2json to
produce sets of audit event instance streams that visit every audit event
definition in a Protocol Verifier PLUS job definition.

== 2 Introduction and Background

'plus2json' has a feature triggered by a command line switch: '--play'.
Thus, the engineers have begun referring to the feature as "plus2json
play".  This feature interprets PLUS job definitions and "plays" out
runtime audit event instance streams compliant to the job definitions.
The value to testing the downstream Protocol Verifier cannot be
over-stated, especially since a source of production input audit event
streams data has been unavailable early in the project.

The current '--play' is limited to producing only one legal pathway
through a job definition.  So, only the one pathway is tested.  Any
particular job definition may have many legal pathways through it.

This work extends 'plus2json --play' to be able to produce many or all
legal pathways through a given job definition with the goal of achieving
graph coverage.

It shall be called `plus2json --playall`.

=== 2.1 Definitions

In the sections following, terminology will be used according to the
following (coined) terms/definitions.

upstream:: One feature of a job definition (audit event definition,
_fork_, _alternative_, etc) is upstream in the directed graph from another
feature if it precedes the other feature sequentially in the job
definition.

downstream:: One feature of a job definition (audit event definition,
_fork_, _alternative_, etc) is downstream from another feature if it
succeeds the other feature sequentially in the job definition.

fork:: an audit event definition with multiple different audit event
definitions following directly after it.  A _fork_ can be constrained as
an AND fork (all _tines_ are traversed) or an XOR _fork_ (only one _tine_
is traversed) in any legal _pathway_.  A Fork is a class in the
'population' subsystem of the PLUS data model.

tine:: a sequence of one or more audit event definitions proceeding
directly from a fork.  The sequence of one or more audit event definitions
proceeding from the start of a loop is also considered a _tine_.  A Tine
is a class in the 'population' subsystem of the PLUS data model.

terminal tine:: a tine which does not merge (ends in 'detach')

alternative:: a _tine_ proceeding from an XOR fork.  This will be modelled
as the 'Alternative' class in the enhanced 'population' subsystem of the
PLUS data model.

depth:: a value applied to an XOR _fork_ or _alternative_ expressed as the
count of upstream XOR _forks_ or _alternatives_ and including the start of
the job.  Thus, the first XOR _fork_ in a job definition has _depth_ 1.
The next downstream XOR _fork_ or _alternative_ has _depth_ 2.  Multiple
_forks_ and _alternatives_ can be at the same _depth_.

pathway:: a complete sequence of runtime audit event instances starting
with the first audit event in a job definition and proceeding legally
through any _forks_, _tines_ and _alternatives_ to the end of the job.
This will be modelled as the 'Pathway' class in the enhanced 'population'
subsystem of the PLUS data model.

graph coverage:: the percentage of audit event definitions in a given job
definition visited at least once by a set of _pathways_

== 3 Requirements

The goal of this work is to enumerate a set of _pathways_ which achieve
full _graph coverage_ of a given job definition by visiting each audit
event definition at least once.

=== 3.1 Multiple Different Pathways

'plus2json --playall' shall produce multiple different pathways through a
single job definition when alternatives are present.

=== 3.2 Tine Coverage

'plus2json --playall' shall produce multiple different pathways covering
all tines in all forks, thus covering all alternatives.

=== 3.3 Command Line Control

'plus2json' shall accept a command line switch (`--playall`) to enable
production of multiple pathways through the given set of job definitions
seeking to achieve 100% graph coverage.

== 4 Analysis

=== 4.1 Graph Traversal in Computer Science

Graph traversal is a well-studied subject within the field of Computer
Science.  Specifically, work on <<dr-2, Breadth First (Tree) Search>> is
applicable to the problem being solved by this work.  Efficient algorithms
exist which traverse trees ensuring a visit to every node.  However,
because of merges and loops in the graphs of PLUS job definitions, direct
application of breadth first search algorithms is not possible.  It is
noted that XOR forks represent nodes in a tree structure.

== 5 Work Required

=== 5.1 Data Model

Update the 'population' subsystem data model of PLUS to include two new
classes:  'Alternative' and 'Pathway'.

Each instance of Pathway represents a unique legal traversal through the
job definition.  Pathways are related to a containing job definition.
Every job definition has at least one pathway, even if there are no
alternatives.  Jobs with alternatives have more than one pathway.

An 'Alternative' is associated with a tine on an XOR fork.  Alternatives
can be related to each other reflexively as upstream and downstream from
one another.  An alternative can be downstream from only one other
(immediate) alternative.  An alternative can be upstream from multiple
other (immediate) alternatives.

.Enhanced 'population' Subsystem Data Model
:image:population1.jpg[enhanced population data model]

=== 5.2 Updated Population

Update the population processing (as driven by the walking of the PLUS
abstract syntax tree).  Populate instances of 'Pathway' and 'Alternative'.

==== 5.2.1 Create Alternatives

When a tine is created, if it is a tine on a fork with an XOR constraint,
create an instance of Alternative and link it to the tine across R63.

==== 5.2.2 Link Upstream/Downstream Alternatives

For each instance of Alternative, navigate upstream through Fork, Fragment
and Tine to the first upstream alternative if one exists.  Link the
downstream alternative to the upstream alternative across R62.

==== 5.2.3 Create/Link Alternative Pathways

Select all end-of-stream instances of Alternative (those having no
downstream alternative across R62).  These instances represent the "leaf
nodes" of the alternative tree.  Create an instance of Pathway.  Link this
pathway to the end-of-stream alternative and to all upstream alternatives
(navigating R62 to each upstream alternative).  This pathway and linked
set of alternatives will guide the interpretation of the job definition
for this pathway.

If there are no alternatives in a particular job definition, create an
ordinal instance of Pathway to serve as the one-and-only pathway through
a simple sequence job definition.  All job definitions have at least one
pathway even if there are no alternatives (XOR forking) in the topology.

=== 5.3 Extended Job Definition Interpretation

=== 5.3.1 Playing Pathways

Enable '--playall' to select all instances of Pathway related to the Job
Definition.  As the interpretation encounters XOR forks, select through
the linked tines and alternatives to the pathway.  Choose to play down the
tine which is linked through the alternative to a pathway matching the one
currently being played.

=== 5.3.2 Coverage Reporting

Add reporting to the end of '--playall' sessions.  Report the number of
pathways played and the graph coverage as a percentage of Audit Event
Definitions visited.

Graph coverage can be calculated by selecting all Audit Event Definition
instances and attempting to traverse to Audit Event.  Any Audit Event
Definition participating in R109 (with Audit Event) has been covered.

=== 5.4 Command Line Control

Provide a command line switch, '--playall' to enable playing all pathways
through the given job definitions (as opposed to playing only a single
pathway).

== 6 Acceptance Test

* `regression.sh` must run correctly.
* Graph coverage must equal or approach 100%.  Anything less than 100%
  must be explainable.

== 7 Document References

. [[dr-1]] https://onefact.atlassian.net/browse/MUN2-119[MUN2-119:  plus2json coverage]
. [[dr-2]] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breadth-first_search[Breadth First (Tree) Search]

---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---
